Education and human capital development
The achievement of a primary enrolment rate above 80.0 per cent in Africa, on average, has garnered much praise in the international development community. Beyond this, however, the core problem in overcoming economic development constraint remains the upgrading of the level of human capital in most of Africa. The poor quality of educational systems together with poor post-primary education enrolment rates are central to Africa’s human capital challenge and to a more equal future growth and development trajectory. 
Data from the Institute for Statistics of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO, 2013), clearly show that, although enrolment in primary school in SSA lags behind other developing regions, that of secondary school is of more concern. The data reveal that for the 2012 cohort of learners, median secondary schooling enrolment in SSA was approximately 30.0 percentage points below that found in South Asia and 57.0 percentage points lower than Western Asia. As one moves from primary to secondary schooling, differential enrolment rates increase sharply and dramatically. These significant and large shifts in enrolment rates as one moves from primary to secondary schooling are strongly suggestive of a secondary schooling system within the SSA region that is significantly underperforming relative to international comparators. For Africa to move its economy toward higher-productivity sectors – not only to sustain growth, but also to reduce inequality by creating gainful employment for its citizens – it needs an adequate supply of skilled labour. 
The regional variation in table 3.3 shows that Central Africa has the lowest secondary school enrolment, with about a 70.0 percentage point difference between primary and secondary enrolment. With the exception of North Africa, which has the best performing enrolment rates in Africa, Southern Africa has the highest secondary enrolment rate, but the level is still less than half of primary school enrolment. 
In addition to enrolment rates, even the quality of education given to children who attend school is poor. The Learning Barometer of the Brookings Institution (2012) reveals that a high proportion of children in school in various African countries are not learning effectively, with proportions as high as 50.0 per cent in Nigeria and between 30.0-40.0 per cent in South Africa, Namibia and Uganda. The effects of children not learning effectively in school can be seen more clearly when African students are compared to those in other developing countries. Using Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS, 2011) data for grade 8 students, the results of standardised mathematics and science tests can be compared. Ranking countries from worst to best reveals that the five African countries included in the data (Ghana, South Africa, Morocco, Botswana and Tunisia) do not compare favourably to comparator countries such as Turkey, Thailand and Chile, and are at the bottom of the distribution. 
To combine issues of enrolment and quality of the educational system, Bhorat (2015) calculates Africa’s ‘conversion rate’ – the shares of individuals within a cohort who would have enrolled at primary school and then progressed through the schooling and higher education system.13 For Africa, the data suggest that there is an equal collapse in the conversion rates from primary to secondary schooling as there is in the conversion from secondary to tertiary enrolment. This is in contrast to the  performance of the other regions of the world. In essence, for Africa, the data show that for every 100 children of primary school age, only four are expected to enter a tertiary educational institution. In the LAC region, 36 out of every 100 within the cohort should make it to a higher education institution, and even in South and West Asia, this figure is at 14 per 100 individuals. These figures highlight the rapid attrition from the schooling system and serve as a powerful indicator of the ineffectiveness of Africa’s educational system. 
In the view of long-run economic growth, currently espoused by Thomas Piketty and others, human capital accumulation is one key mechanism through which to overcome a growth path where the rate of return on capital (r) exceeds the rate of economic growth (g) such that r>g. To generate a more equal growth path, thus equalising r and g, it is argued that the schooling and educational systems plays a potentially crucial role in an economy’s long-run growth trajectory. In Africa, on the basis of this supply-side evidence, it is clear that the continent is far from producing a schooling and higher education system that is sufficiently inequality-reducing. See Chapter 11 for more illumination on the relationship between human development and inequality in Africa.